HERE TO DISCUSS IS -- Sanam Vakil
DIRECTOR OF THE MIDDLE EAST
PROGRAM AT LONDON'S CHATHAM
HOUSE THINK TANK.
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
DO YOU FEEL, LIKE APPARENTLY
THE SECRETARY OF STATE DOES,
THAT THINGS ARE REALLY
TEETERING ON THE EDGE RIGHT NOW
IN TERMS OF THE WAR EXPANDING
FROM GAZA AND ACROSS ISRAEL'S
NORTHERN BORDER INTO LEBANON?
>> THERE IS A DEEP CONCERN.
WHAT IT'S BECOME ALMOST
NORMALIZED, SIMMERING TENSIONS
COULD REALLY BOIL OVER.
THAT'S REALLY WHERE WE ARE.
WE'VE HAD ATTACKS COMING FROM
THE HOUTHIS IN YEMEN THAT HAVE
ATTACKED MARITIME SHIPPING.
WE HAVE SEEN BACK AND FORTH
BETWEEN HEZBOLLAH AND ISRAEL AT
A DANGEROUS LEVEL DESPITE THE
REGULAR MESSAGING FROM HASSAN
AS LAURA THAT THERE IS NO
INTENTION OF REGIONALIZE-ING
THIS WAR.
ATTACKS AND, SYRIA TAX AND IRAQ
AND THIS COULD WELL LEAD TO A
MISCALCULATION.
>> CAN I JUST POINTED EMPHASIZE
WHAT YOU JUST SAID ABOUT NO
STRATA, --
WE READ-BASED JOURNALIST
TWEETED THAT HEZBOLLAH AND IRAN
HAVE SIGNALED REPEATEDLY THAT
THEY WANT TO VOID WAR --
AT SOME POINT THEY WILL
MISCALCULATE.
THIS WAS AFTER THE
ASSASSINATIONS WE'VE JUST BEEN
TALKING ABOUT.
YOU KNOW THE REGION.
EVERYBODY THINKS THEY HAVE --
THEY ARE PLAYING A VERY CLEVER
GAME, TARGETED JUST SO,
CALIBRATED JUST SO.
BUT IS MISCALCULATION SOMETHING
THAT COULD HAPPEN?
THE ISRAELIS ON THE LEBANESE
EVERY WENT HAPPENED ACROSS THAT
BORDER IN 2006, MOST NOTABLY.
>> THIS IS THE CLEAR RISK AND
THIS WAS PART OF ANTHONY
BLINKEN'S PRIMARY OBJECTIVE FOR
THIS TRIP.
TO MESSAGE THAT ESCALATION IS
NOT AN ANTIBODIES INTEREST.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT THEY ARE
TWO DIFFERENT STRATEGIES AND
TIMELINES UNDERWAY IN THE
REGION.
NO COUNTRY, NO STATE OR NON
STATE ACTOR UNDER REGION IS
REALLY PUSHING FOR ESCALATION.
WHEREAS THE ISRAELI GOVERNMENT
IS TRYING TO RESET IT'S
DETERRENCE LEVELS SINCE OCTOBER
7TH AND THAT REQUIRES THEM NOT
ONLY TO TRY AND DECAPITATE
HAMAS LEADERSHIP, WHICH WE KNOW,
94 DAYS ON FROM OCTOBER 7TH,
THEY HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO DO.
BUT ALSO TO TRY TO PUSH BACK
HEZBOLLAH MADE CLEAR THAT
THEY'RE PORTERS ARE SAFE AND
THAT IS WHAT IS ONGOING RIGHT
NOW.
WHERE IS THE REST OF THE REGION,
UTERINE, YET HEZBOLLAH, BEAT
THE WIDER ARAB PARTNERS OF THE
UNITED STATES, HAVE NO INTEREST
IN SEEING THIS EXPLODE BECAUSE
IT COULD TAKE THINGS INTO A NEW
ORBIT.
>> REMIND EVERYBODY, I COVERED
THE 2006, WAR IT WAS NOT A
VICTORY BY ISRAEL OR HEZBOLLAH.
AT BEST IT WAS DETERMINED TO
HAVE BEEN FOUGHT TO A DRAW.
THERE WAS A U.N. RESOLUTION,
1701, THAT REQUIRED THEM TO
MOVE BACK FROM DEMARCATED
LANDS.
APPARENTLY NONE OF THEM KEPT TO
THAT COMMITMENT.
IS THERE A POLITICAL SOLUTION
THAT ACTUALLY CAN REINFORCE AND
DE-ESCALATE THE LEBANON OR
HEZBOLLAH ISRAEL TENSION RIGHT
NOW?
>> HAMAS HOCHSTEIN, ANOTHER
U.S., OFFICIAL WAS JUSTIN
LEBANON FOR THIS VERY ISSUE.
TRYING TO FIND A FACE SAVING
SOLUTION TO PUSH HEZBOLLAH
BACK.
ACCORDING TO U.N. RESOLUTION
1701, PASSED THE LAW TONY
RIVER.
AND ALSO FIND A FACE EVENING
WAY FOR HEZBOLLAH TO DO THAT.
THERE HAVE BEEN SUGGESTIONS
THAT HEZBOLLAH IS PULLING BACK,
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, YOU SEE
ISRAELIS KEEP PRESSING AND KEEP
STRIKING AT COMMANDERS IN
LEBANON.
THIS MIGHT BE LOW-LEVEL
ESCALATION, BUT THERE WILL BE,
ONE DAY WHERE THIS GOES TO.
FIRE THIS COULD BE A VERY
DIFFERENT MORE THAN 2006.
>> THEY SPOKE WHEN ALL OF THIS
FLARED UP TO THE LEBANESE
FOREIGN MINISTER WHO AT THE
TIME WAS IN WASHINGTON, GOING
TO VISIT THE WHITE HOUSE AND
TALK ABOUT THESE TENSIONS.
THIS IS WHAT HE SAID TO ME.
>> WE DON'T WANT ANY ESCALATION
IN THE WAR.
WE DON'T WANT WHAT IS HAPPENING
IN THE SOUTH COULD BE SPREAD
OVER LEBANON.
WE DON'T LIKE A REGIONAL WAR,
BECAUSE IT IS DANGEROUS TO
EVERYONE.
DANGEROUS TO LEBANON, DANGEROUS
TO ISRAEL AND TO THE COUNTRIES
SURROUNDING ISRAEL.
>> HE HAS PRETTY MUCH LAID IT
OUT, BUT IT IS VERY IMPORTANT
FOR THE PRIME MINISTER OF THAT
COUNTRY, AN ALLY OF THE UNITED
STATES, TO BE SAYING THAT.
HOW DOES ISRAEL, IF IT DOES
BROADEN INTO A BIG, OR HOW DO
YOU SEPARATE A WAR AGAINST
HEZBOLLAH FROM A WAR AGAINST
LEBANON ITSELF AND THE
WESTERN-BACKED LEBANESE ARMED
FORCES WHO HAVE ALSO BEEN
TARGETED?
>> I DON'T THINK YOU CAN,
REALLY.
>> THE ISRAELIS SAY WE'RE NOT
STRIKING THE LEBANESE STATE.
>> THIS WILL BE SEEN AS A
BROADER WAR.
IT IS A WAR THAT WON'T JUST BE
ABOUT HEZBOLLAH.
THIS WILL INVOLVE THE WHOLE
SYSTEM, HEZBOLLAH ITSELF IS
EMBEDDED INTO THAT SYSTEM AND
IT IS PART OF THE GOVERNING
SYSTEM, WHETHER THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY OR THE
LEBANESE LIKE IT OR NOT.
THAT IN ITSELF IS THE PROBLEM.
>> I WANT TO ASK YOU A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS.
AND THE TIMES OF LONDON THE,
SUNDAY THE SUNDAY, TIMES YOU
MIGHT HAVE READ, IT THERE'S A
FRONT PAGE ARTICLE BY AN
ISRAELI JOURNALIST WHO TALKED
ABOUT THE STASH OF PAPERS AND
DOCUMENTS AND MAYBE OUR DRIVES
THAT SOME OF THE ISRAELI FORCES
HAD FOUND APPARENTLY IN HIYASSY
NOIR'S OFFICE.
IT TALKED ABOUT HOW, FROM A
COUPLE YEARS AGO, TALKED ABOUT
TRYING TO DISRUPT ANY
NORMALIZATION AT THE TIME
BETWEEN TURKEY AND ISRAEL.
AND IT TALKED ABOUT THEIR
STRATEGY.
BEFORE, THERE IS ALSO, I THINK
CHAD AMASSED EVEN PUT THIS OUT,
BROWN WHEN MATT EXCUSE TO BE A
JOURNALIST HAD INTERVIEWED,
YEARS AGO, THE HAMAS LEADER WHO
IS ASSASSINATED.
HE HAD SAID TO HER THAT OUR AIM
IS TO RADICALIZE, IN HER WORDS,
THE PALESTINIAN POPULATION.
SO THAT THEY DO NOT GO TOWARDS
PEACE.
HAMAS WANTS TO DELEGITIMIZED
THE PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY AND
SORT OF DISABLE ANY SENTIMENT
TOWARDS PEACE.
DO YOU THINK THAT IS STILL WHAT
THEY THINK?
IN WHICH CASE, HOW DOES ONE GET
OVER THIS?
HOW DOES ONE GET TO A DAY AFTER?
>> CERTAINLY THERE ARE ELEMENTS
OF PALESTINIAN LEADERSHIP,
HAMAS LEADERSHIP THAT HAVE MORE
RADICAL SENTIMENTS.
WHERE WE ARE TODAY,
NORMALIZATION HAS SLOWED IF NOT
STOPPED COMPLETELY.
IT WILL BE VERY FAR AND HARD TO
ACHIEVE WITHOUT A CEASE-FIRE
AND WITHOUT ATTENDING TO THE
HUMANITARIAN ISSUES ON THE
TABLE.
AS WELL AS WITHOUT A PLAN THAT
ADDRESSES THE ISSUE OF
PALESTINIAN STATEHOOD THAT HAVE
BEEN COMPLETELY ABANDONED.
THAT'S, I THINK, A PRIMARY TASK
HERE.
BUT BEYOND, THAT WHAT IS
URGENTLY NEEDED IS A PATHWAY
THAT CREATES A PROCESS FOR
PALESTINIAN LEADERS TO WORK
TOGETHER FOR REFORM,
ACCOUNTABILITY, GOVERNANCE WITH
ELECTIONS AT THE END OF THIS
PROCESS.
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR PALESTINIANS
THEMSELVES TO ELECT FUTURE
LEADERS SHOULD CERTAINLY BE AN
OPPORTUNITY GIVEN TO
PALESTINIANS, NOT ONE THAT
THEY'VE HAD FOR WELL OVER TWO
DECADES NOW.
>> THEY HAVEN'T GONE TO
ELECTIONS.
LAST QUESTION, YOU'RE AN EXPERT
AND A STUDENT OF THE IRAN PIECE
OF THIS WHOLE PICTURE.
IT ALSO SEEMS TO BE TRYING TO
BE STAYING OUT OF A DIRECT
CONFRONTATION.
HOW LONG CAN THAT LAST?
WHAT REALLY DOES IRAN WANT OUT
OF ALL OF THIS?
>> IRAN'S MOTIVATIONS ARE
MULTIPLE.
ULTIMATELY, THE ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC HAS ALWAYS BEEN DRIVEN
BY ITS OWN SENSE OF SURVIVAL
ABOVE ALL AND ITS SECURITY AND
STABILITY HAS ALWAYS BEEN
PARAMOUNT.
IT HAS RELIED ON THE ACCESS OF
RESISTANCE, THIS NETWORK IT IS
CULTIVATED AND CREATED OVER A
NUMBER OF DECADES.
AS ITS PRIMARY TOOL OF
DETERRENCE AGAINST ISRAEL AND
THE UNITED STATES.
TWO COUNTRIES THAT IT HAS
DEFINED AS ITS THREATS IN THE
REGION.
IT WILL CONTINUE TO SUPPORT THE
ACCESS OF RESISTANCE, BUT AT
THE SAME TIME, HERENDA SEE THE
U.S. AS A DECLINING INFLUENCE
IN THE REGION.
HATE DESTABILIZING REGIONAL
INFLUENCE ABOVE ALL.
AND IRAN HAS OVER THE YEARS
RESTORED TIES WITH THE GULF
ARAB COUNTRIES AND IS LOOKING
TO FORGE STRONGER ECONOMIC
LINKAGES AND BE PART OF AN
INTEGRATED MIDDLE EAST AS WELL
THAT, OF COURSE, IT'S HARD TO
ACHIEVE THIS OPPOSITIONAL
STANCE WITH THE UNITED STATES,
ACCELERATING NUCLEAR PROGRAM
AND, OF COURSE, THIS UNDERLYING
TENSION WITH ISRAEL THAT IS, I
THINK, TEHRAN'S CALCULATING IT
WILL INCREASE OVER THIS YEAR IN
PARTICULAR.
>> VERY BRIEFLY BEFORE I LET
YOU GO, DO YOU THINK THERE IS A
WAY TO PULL THINGS BACK?
THE ISRAELI FOREIGN MINISTER
TOLD THE U.S. FOREIGN MINISTER
TODAY THEY'RE LOOKING FOR SOME
KIND OF DIPLOMATIC SOLUTION.
>> YES, I THINK THERE IS, AND
IT BEGINS WITH THE CEASE-FIRE.
THAT CEASE-FIRE CAN SET THE
PATHWAY FORWARD TO RELEASE
HOSTAGES THAT HAVE BEEN
COMPLETELY NEGLECTED, AS GIDEON
LEVY BROUGHT UP IN YOUR
PREVIOUS INTERVIEW.
BEYOND THAT, OF COURSE, THE
ARAB STATES, PARTNERS OF THE
UNITED STATES, ARE GOING TO
NEED TO PLAY A REALLY IMPORTANT
AND INTEGRAL ROLE IN
GUARANTEEING PALESTINIAN
SECURITY, ISRAELI SECURITY,
PROVIDING A BRIDGE TO IRAN AND
MAKING SURE THEY ARE NOT A
SPOILER AND WHAT COMES NEXT.
THIS IS GOING TO BE A LONG
PROCESS WAITING FOR THE DAY
AFTER TO BEGIN THAT PROCESS A
BIT TOO LATE TO.
OR >> SANAM VAKLI, CHATHAM
HOUSE, THANK YOU INDEED FOR
JOINING US.